Tags: Python, Flask, Bootstrap, Jinja2, HTML

# 2023-09-30

## Blog Capstone

Ran into a problem trying to create this template because it wanted you to create a header template that includes the upper `<html>` tag and then a footer template that creates the lower closing tag. The problem is that when I autosave, the autocorrect tries to be helpful and automatically closes that unclosed tag in the header, so it wasn't appearing when I imported it.

Damn, I'm having a really hard time trying to turn off auto closing tags. I'm trying to turn it off from the VS Code settings and from the Prettier formatter by using `<!-- prettier-ignore -->` at the top of the file, but something's not working.

I was able to get it to work by turning Prettier off for the workspace, but that seems like a less than ideal situation since I want to use it in other files. Will have to investigate further later how to do this on a per-file basis.

I still couldn't get the header to work until I pasted the solution in - I must've messed something up but I don't feel like tracking it down right now.

I asked ChatGPT if splitting these tags was best practice for Jinja and it says it's not. You should instead use a base template like this:

###### base.html

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
    <head>
        <title>{% block title %}Default Title{% endblock %}</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        {% block content %} {% endblock %}
    </body>
</html>
```

You then extend the base template with child templates, like so:

###### child.html

```html
{% extends "base.html" %} {% block title %}Child Page{% endblock %} {% block
content %}
<p>This is the child page.</p>
{% endblock %}
```

This is something I learned a few days ago, but since the lesson is designed a little stupidly, I didn't think to move in this direction. This method totally avoids breaking two related tags into two different files, which seems like it'd be a nightmare to figure out what's wrong (hence me not even bothering to try to figure out what stupid typo I made that made it not work earlier).

I will attempt to refactor the lesson into this inheritance pattern.

Was finally able to get `<!-- prettier-ignore -->` to work. [Here's more info on their docs page.](https://prettier.io/docs/en/ignore.html)

Was making a silly error by writing:

```jinja
href="{{ url_for('static', filename='static/css/styles.css') }}"
```

which would cause a `404` error. I accidentally included the `static` folder inside the `filename` argument, but I should leave that out since it's already searching inside of the `static` folder.

When working with Jinja, it's best to use this `url_for()` function to point at assets instead of hardcoding them for several reasons, but the most obvious and important one is that if you're not running the site on `http://localhost` the URL would break. It will also throw errors if the file is missing, making it easier to track down the problem if there is one.

I figured out what was going on with `<!-- prettier-ignore -->` you just have to place it directly above what you want it to ignore, and you can't have any comments in between it and the rest of what you want it to ignore.

I ran into a problem where I wanted to pass the `year` variable I'd generated with the `datetime` module to the `base.html` file. It wasn't being called in any of the functions, so how to do that?

I asked ChatGPT and it told me about the `@app.context_processor` decorator, which allows you to pass variables to all templates globally.

```python
@app.context_processor
def inject_year():
    return {'year': datetime.now().year}
```

Fetching the year this way also has the added bonus of it being updated more frequently, whereas I think if you'd done in in your `app.py` file you'd have to restart your server to get it to fetch the new year. This way (at least I think) every time you get a new page it rereads the year.

Ok, I completed that. In the end it felt good to be able to take some work that was already made and convert it to using Flask, since I assume this type of work — taking something that already exists and refactoring it for a new framework — can be a typical job IRL. It was frustrating, but a lot of the errors I was making were simple syntax ones like forgetting to wrap something in quotes.

The repo is available [here](https://github.com/markalanboyd/bootstrap-flask-blog).
