# 2023-10-08

Tags: Python, Flask, SQLite, SQLAlchemy, wtforms

## Top 10 Movie Website Continued

I wasn't able to get much pushed forward today since I was still documenting the file structure work I'd done, but I was able to get a couple things worked out.

### Custom Validators for wtforms

You can write a custom validator for a wtforms form by importing `ValidationError` from `wtforms.validators` and following the pattern:

```python
@staticmethod
def __validate_something(form, field):
    if field: # Check something about the field
        raise ValidationError("Error message")
```

Even if you don't use the `form` in your validator, you still need to add it. This is because of the structure of the validators wtforms uses. If you want to create a validator that relies on a different field (say, validating an end date is after the start date) you need to have access to the start date through the `forms` argument.

```python
year = IntegerField("Year", [DataRequired(), __validate_year])
```

Also, when you add the validator to the list of validators, you do not add `()` after it. The reason is the form is validated later in the code, not on that exact line, so you simply want to pass the function into the list where it is called later. The other classes that you import and use as validators like `DataRequired` actually return a function that is then called later at the line `form.validate_on_submit()`.

```python
@staticmethod
def __validate_rating(form, field):
    rating = field.data
    if rating < 0.0 or rating > 10.0:
        raise ValidationError("Rating must be between 0.0 and 10.0")
    field.data = round(rating, 1)
```

Another thing to note here is that you can manipulate the form field without returning it. Once the entry passes validation, the float is rounded to the 10ths place before being passed to the database.