# 2023-10-05

Tags: Python, Flask, SQLite, SQLAlchemy

## Virtual Bookshelf with Flask and SQLite

Today I'm finally learning about databases and how to work with them.

### SQLite 101

SQLite is so popular it's a built-in library for Python. This is some example code that we'll be using for the Virtual Bookshelf project:

```python
import sqlite3

db = sqlite3.connect("books-collection.db")

cursor = db.cursor()

sql_query = """CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS books (
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    title varchar(250) NOT NULL UNIQUE,
    author varchar(250) NOT NULL,
    rating FLOAT NOT NULL
)"""

cursor.execute(sql_query)
```

First we of course import `sqlite3` and then create our database by calling `sqlite3.connect("books-collection.db")`. If the database isn't present in the file already, it gets created. If it is, it is just connected to.

We then have to create a cursor with the line `cursor = db.cursor()`, which will be the method in which we interact with the database.

To create a new table for our collection, we have to use the SQL language, which is passed to `cursor.execute()` as a query.

With the query, we're creating a table called books. If it already exists, it just skips this process with the check `IF NOT EXISTS`. It sets a column called `id` which is of the `INTEGER` type as the primary key, or the primary method by which books will be searched for. Primary keys must be unique.

The `title` column has a few conditions put on it. `varchar(250)` lets the entry be any character up to 250 characters in length. The length limit is helpful to prevent accidental or malicious insertions of large amounts of data. It is also `NOT NULL` meaning the query to add a new entry will be rejected if the field isn't filled out and the column must also be `UNIQUE` or the query will also be rejected.

The `author` column is required but it doesn't need to be unique as of course people could read multiple books by the same author.

The `rating` column is set to `FLOAT` to allow decimal ratings and is also required.

You can't view this database file directly without either an external program like [DB Browser for SQLite](https://sqlitebrowser.org/dl/) or a plugin for VS Code like [SQLite Viewer](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=qwtel.sqlite-viewer).

To add a row, we have to do a few things.

```python
data = (1, 'The Stand', 'Stephen King', 9.3)
cursor.execute("INSERT INTO books VALUES(?, ?, ?, ?)", data)
db.commit()
```

First things first, you want to protect yourself from SQL injection attacks, which means you want to split your data up from your `cursor.execute()` command so that the data is only ever treated as data and not executable code.

This way, we pass `data` into the `execute()` function while using the `INSERT INTO books` command. In the `VALUES(?, ?, ?, ?)` function the question marks placeholders for the data you're passing through via the tuple. You must make sure the tuple and `VALUES(?)` match in length or you will get an error that says you have an incorrect number of bindings.

Finally, you have to then call `db.commit()` to actually push the changes to the database. By separating the `cursor.execute()` and the `db.commit()` commands, you are able to make multiple in-memory changes before you push that change to the database. In larger applications this can help the database in two ways: the database can work more efficiently by committing larger blocks of data rather than single rows, and you can also roll back the database if an error has occurred in an all-or-nothing transaction.

### SQLAlchemy

SQLAlchemy makes writing SQL queries in Python easier. SQLAlchemy is an object-relational mapping library. It acts like an intermediary between the native syntax of Python and the SQL language necessary to query the database.

```python
from sqlalchemy import create_engine, Column, Integer, String, Float
from sqlalchemy.ext.declarative import declarative_base
from sqlalchemy.orm import sessionmaker

Base = declarative_base()

class Book(Base):
    __tablename__ = 'books'

    id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True)
    title = Column(String, unique=True, nullable=False)
    author = Column(String, nullable=False)
    rating = Column(Float, nullable=False)

# Create database engine and table
engine = create_engine('sqlite:///books.db')
Base.metadata.create_all(engine)

# Create a new book object
new_book = Book(title="The Shining", author="Stephen King", rating=9.5)

# Add new book to the database
Session = sessionmaker(bind=engine)
session = Session()
session.add(new_book)
session.commit()
```

We have to import a few things from `sqlalchemy`, and one thing to point out is that we need to import the types that we'll set each column to individually.

The code starts by declare the `Base` class which contains all the code necessary to translate between Python and SQL.

We then create a subclass of `Base` called `Book().` The `Book()` represents one object or row in a table called `books` whose name we define inside the subclass with the line `__tablename__ = 'books'`.

Next we set each variable to be a `Column()`. The first argument is the data type followed by keyword arguments. The `primary_key=True` line sets the `id` as the primary key. You can also then add constraints like `unique=True` and `nullable=False`

Once we have our class/tables set up, we call `create_engine()` on the URI of the database. If it doesn't exist, it gets created. Then, we use the method `Base.metadata.create_all(engine)` to look through the children of the `Base` class and create their tables if they don't already exist.

Now, we can start adding new books by creating a new `Book` object. 

```python
new_book = Book(title="The Shining", author="Stephen King", rating=9.5)
```

The `id` should not be specified because SQLAlchemy will iterate that as the item is added to the table.

```python
Session = sessionmaker(bind=engine)
session = Session()
session.add(new_book)
session.commit()
```

This part of the code uses a factory which is something that creates classes. This `Session()` class is bound to the `engine` which is the database we're working with, and then we assign the `Session()` class to a `session`. Now we can use the methods of the class to add a new book and commit the changes to the database with the final two lines.

### Flask SQLAlchemy

When using the Flask-SQLAlchemy library the code is a little less verbose for doing the same thing.

```python
from flask import Flask, render_template, request, redirect, url_for
from flask_sqlalchemy import SQLAlchemy


app = Flask(__name__)
app.config["SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI"] = "sqlite:///books.db"

db = SQLAlchemy(app)


class Book(db.Model):
    __tablename__ = "books"

    id = db.Column(db.Integer, primary_key=True)
    title = db.Column(db.String(250), unique=True, nullable=False)
    author = db.Column(db.String(250), nullable=False)
    rating = db.Column(db.Numeric(2, 1), nullable=False)


@app.route("/")
def home():
    books = Book.query.all()
    return render_template("index.html", books=books)


@app.route("/add", methods=["GET", "POST"])
def add():
    if request.method == "POST":
        book = Book(
            title=request.form["title"],
            author=request.form["author"],
            rating=request.form["rating"],
        )
        db.session.add(book)
        db.session.commit()
        return "Success!"
    return render_template("add.html")


if __name__ == "__main__":
    with app.app_context():
        db.create_all()
    app.run(debug=True)

```

A key thing to note is you have to set the the `app.config["SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI"]` before you instantiate the `db` instance.

Instead of needing to explicitly import the `Column()` function all of the types, you can just access them as a method of the `db` instance.

You can also skip the factory step of creating the session and just call `db.session.add(book)` to add the object you've created, and then `db.session.commit()` to commit the data to the database.

A big change though is you need to use the `app.app_context():` before you start the app to call `db.create_all()`. This `db.create_all()` creates all of the uncreated tables in your database. However, you can't just simply run `db.create_all()` before `app.run()` because the database instance needs some configurations that are attached to the Flask app instance. By using `with app.appcontext()` you provide the database that information, like the URI for instance.

As a sidenote, you can have this pattern called an application factory which helps with creating multiple environments with different configurations (like dev, test, prod).

```python
from flask import Flask
from flask_sqlalchemy import SQLAlchemy

db = SQLAlchemy()

def create_app():
    app = Flask(__name__)
    app.config['SQLALCHEMY_DATABASE_URI'] = 'sqlite:///books.db'
    
    db.init_app(app)

    return app
```

In this way you're separating the step of creating the database class and initializing it. All-in-all, it's a more flexible approach that can help the code be more modular.

In the previous code above, we were just returning all of the data from the database at once to display on the homepage.

```python
@app.route("/")
def home():
    books = Book.query.all()
    return render_template("index.html", books=books)
```

However, if we want to order them by Author, we have to alter the query so that they get returned in alphabetical order.

```python
@app.route("/")
def home():
    result = db.session.execute(db.select(Book).order_by(Book.author))
    books = result.scalars()
    return render_template("index.html", books=books)
```

There's also a difference in the way the data is returned. In the first example, we're returning all of the `Book()` objects which can be iterated over and have their attributes access. In the second query, we're returning just the data (what are called scalars in SQL), not any additional methods that might be encapsulated within the objects. The second method is preferred when you just need the data as it's less memory-intensive.

### CRUD Operations for Flask-SQLAlchemy

|Operation|Method|Description|Example Code|
|-|-|-|-|
|Create|`db.session.add(object)`|Adds a new record to the database.|`db.session.add(new_book)`|
||`db.session.add_all([obj1, obj2])`|Adds multiple new records.|`db.session.add_all([new_book, new_user])`|
|Read|`Model.query.get_or_404(id)`|Retrieves one record by primary key or returns 404.|`book = Book.query.get_or_404(1)`|
||`Model.query.filter_by(**kwargs)`|Retrieves records based on a filter.|`published_books = Book.query.filter_by(is_published=True).all()`|
||`Model.query.first_or_404()`|Retrieves the first record that matches or returns 404.|`book = Book.query.filter_by(title='Some Title').first_or_404()`|
|Update|`object.attribute = value`|Updates an attribute.|`book.title = 'New Title'`|
||`db.session.commit()`|Commits changes.|`db.session.commit()`|
|Delete|`db.session.delete(object)`|Deletes a record.|`db.session.delete(book_to_delete)`|
||`db.session.commit()`|Commits deletion.|`db.session.commit()`|


