# 2023-10-04

Tags: Python, Flask, Jinja2, wtforms

## Blog Capstone Part 5

I just learneda bout the `super()` method for Jinja which allows you to inherit within a particular block.

This particular bit of CSS styling is present in the `base.html` file.

```jinja
<style>
    {% block style %}
        body {
            background: purple;
        }
    {% endblock style %}
</style>
```

If we want to extend this styling in another template, all we have to do is call the `super()` method, which inserts everything from the template into the block, after which you can then alter the styling.

```jinja
{% block style %}
	{{ super() }}
	h1 {
		color: red;
	}
{% endblock style %}
```

You call it as if it is a variable since it is essentially returning the text of the part of the template it's inheriting from. If you left out the `super()` method, the code would overwrite all of the styling, so instead of having a purple background and a red h1, it would only have a red h1.

### Bootstrap-Flask

Bootstrap-Flask is confusingly a fork of Flask-Bootstrap, and you import it using the statement

```python
from flask_bootstrap import Bootstrap5
```

You then also have to instatiate a class after you've created your app like this:

```python
app = Flask(__name__)
app.config["SECRET_KEY"] = SECRET_KEY

bootstrap = Bootstrap5(app)
```

Afterwards, you can then import Bootstrap CSS and JS into the `base.html`template like this:

```jinja
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">

  <head>
    <meta charset="UTF-8" />
    <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0" />

    {% block styles %}
    <!-- Bootstrap CSS -->
    {{ bootstrap.load_css() }}
    {% endblock styles %}
    <title>{% block title %}{% endblock title %}</title>
  </head>

  <body>
    {% block content %}{% endblock content %}
    {% block scripts %}
    <!-- Bootstrap JS -->
    {{ bootstrap.load_js() }} {% endblock scripts %}
  </body>

</html>
```

After the `meta` tag you just insert a block that you can refer to as `styles` and then call the `bootstrap.load_css()` method within a variable frame. Same goes for the Boostsrap JavaScript, though you of course do that just before the ending `body` tag.

BTW it's too much a pain in the ass to fight against Prettier, which does not have support for Jinja. I can keep researching for something more suitable, and people mentioned creating a plugin for Prettier to help, but so far no dice. So for now at least I'll just let it mangle the formatting, because writing HTML without a linter sucks as much if not more so.